Use attributes for deferred type (#131)
j3-fortran/generics: J3-Papers/syntax-intro-and-deferred-args.txt

      - class(T) :: local

<deferred-type-declaration-stmt> <<is>> 
         TYPE, [<deferred-type-attr-list>] DEFERRED 
         [, <deferred-type-attr-list>] :: <deferred-type-list>

<deferred-type-attr> <<is>> ABSTRACT

>                      <<or>> EXTENSIBLE

Author: I think I like your suggestion here. One minor nit though is that then the <deferred-type-attr-list> is not optional (i.e. no `[ ]`). I'll fix it.

      - class(T) :: local

<deferred-type-declaration-stmt> <<is>> 

>          TYPE, [<deferred-type-attr-list>] :: <deferred-type-list>

Author: ```suggestion
         TYPE, <deferred-type-attr-list> :: <deferred-type-list>
```

<deferred-type-attr> <<is>> DEFERRED
                     <<or>> ABSTRACT
                     <<or>> EXTENSIBLE

Constraint: DEFERRED shall appear in each <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Constraint: The same <deferred-type-attr> shall not appear more than
            once in a given <deferred-type-attr-list>.

> Constraint: ABSTRACT and EXTENSIBLE shall not both appear in the same
>             <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Author: ```suggestion
```

<deferred-type> <<is>> <name>

Constraint: A <deferred-type> entity shall not appear as
            <parent-type-name> in an EXTENDS attribute.

Constraint: Each <deferred-type> shall appear in <deferred-arg-list>
            of the innermost scoping unit.

A <deferred-type> is a deferred type.

> A deferred type with the EXTENSIBLE attribute is an extensible derived
> type.A deferred type with the ABSTRACT is an abstract derived type. A
> deferred type with the ABSTRACT attribute implicitly has the
> EXTENSIBLE attribute.

Author: ```suggestion
A deferred type with the EXTENSIBLE attribute is an extensible derived
type.A deferred type with the ABSTRACT attribute is an abstract derived
type. A deferred type with the ABSTRACT attribute implicitly has the
EXTENSIBLE attribute.
```

> EXTENSIBLE attribute.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if there needs to be another paragraph here like

> If the ABSTRACT keyword appears, the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute. If the EXTENSIBLE keyword appears, the deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE attribute.

The standard seems inconsistent about how it does this for other things. I'm trying to find in the standard where a keyword such as "ABSTRACT" or "BIND(C)" actually gives the entity the ABSTRACT or BIND(C) attributes.

The standard says this in 8.5.1:

> An attribute may be explicitly specified by an _attr-spec_ in a type declaration statement or by an attribute specification statement (8.6). 

That only applies to data objects, though; _attr-spec_ and attribute specification statements are all only for data objects.

For derived types, there is this sentence which makes the SEQUENCE statement give the derived type the SEQUENCE attribute:

> If the SEQUENCE statement appears, the type has the SEQUENCE attribute and is a sequence type.

But I can't find anything like that for ABSTRACT, or any of the things in `binding-attr` (e.g. DEFERRED, NON_OVERRIDABLE). It seems like the standard just implies that keywords in an "attr" BNF as part a declaration give the declared entities those attributes. But then why would it need to specify that specifically for _attr-spec_ in 8.5.1?

Author: I think I've got the text correct now, and added a note to clarify the consequence of the rules.

Author: > do order of declarations matter here?

> Does the compiler need to scan ahead for the explicit specification first,

I don't think the look ahead method would be required, but it does need to do a comparison of any ultimate specifications in effect when it gets to an explicit specification. This will apply for several aspects of deferred arguments.

Reviewer: Both of your responses on this comment thread are for a different comment thread 😄 But okay, I think the order of declarations thing is workable. And I think your new text is okay. (I'm still not sure why just "If all ultimate specifications of a deferred type have the ABSTRACT attribute, then the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute." doesn't work. But what you have seems to work too.)

> type. A deferred type with the ABSTRACT attribute implicitly has the
> EXTENSIBLE attribute.

Author: ```suggestion
type. A deferred type with the ABSTRACT attribute implicitly has the
EXTENSIBLE attribute, which can be confirmed with an explicit inclusion
of the EXTENSIBLE keyword.
```

      - class(T) :: local

<deferred-type-declaration-stmt> <<is>> 
         TYPE, <deferred-type-attr-list> :: <deferred-type-list>

<deferred-type-attr> <<is>> DEFERRED
                     <<or>> ABSTRACT
                     <<or>> EXTENSIBLE

Constraint: DEFERRED shall appear in each <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Constraint: The same <deferred-type-attr> shall not appear more than
            once in a given <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Constraint: Each <deferred-type> shall appear in <deferred-arg-list>
            of the TEMPLATE, REQUIREMENT or STP in which it appears.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

      - class(T) :: local

<deferred-type-declaration-stmt> <<is>> 
         TYPE, <deferred-type-attr-list> :: <deferred-type-list>

<deferred-type-attr> <<is>> DEFERRED
                     <<or>> ABSTRACT
                     <<or>> EXTENSIBLE

Constraint: DEFERRED shall appear in each <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Constraint: The same <deferred-type-attr> shall not appear more than
            once in a given <deferred-type-attr-list>.

Constraint: Each <deferred-type> shall appear in <deferred-arg-list>
            of the TEMPLATE, REQUIREMENT or STP in which it appears.

> Constraint: Each <deferred-type> shall appear in <deferred-arg-list>
>             of the TEMPLATE, REQUIREMENT or STP in which it appears.

Author: ```suggestion
```

            deferred type, then all ultimate specifications of that
            deferred argument shall be deferred type.

UTI: Is this how we want this to work?

If any ultimate specification of a deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE
attribute, then the deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE attribute.

   REQUIREMENT R1{U}
      TYPE, DEFERRED :: U
   END REQUIREMENT

   REQUIREMENT R2{U}
      TYPE, DEFERRED, EXTENSIBLE :: U
   END REQUIREMENT

   REQUIREMENT R3{U}
      TYPE, DEFERRED, ABSTRACT :: U
   END REQUIREMENT

   TEMPLATE T1{T}
      REQUIRES R1{T} ! valid, non-extensible
   END TEMPLATE

   TEMPLATE T2{T}
      REQUIRES R2{T} ! valid, extensible
   END TEMPLATE

   TEMPLATE T3{T}
      REQUIRES R3{T} ! valid, but T is just extensible

>    END TEMPLATE

Author: This is specifically where I'm questioning.

Author: Based on our discussion, included that if all specs of a deferred type are abstract that it is abstract.

            deferred type, then all ultimate specifications of that
            deferred argument shall be deferred type.

If any ultimate specification of a deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE
attribute, then the deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE attribute.

> If all ultimate specifications of a deferred type have the ABSTRACT
> attribute, then the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute. Otherwise
> the deferred type does not have the ABSTRACT attribute.

Author: ```suggestion
If all ultimate specifications of a deferred type have the ABSTRACT
attribute, then the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute. Otherwise
if it does not have an explicit specification or has an explicit
specification that does not have the ABSTRACT attribute, then it
does not have the ABSTRACT attribute.
```

Reviewer: Why can't you just remove the Otherwise clause entirely? So this paragraph can give the deferred type the abstract attribute, but not take it away.

Reviewer: Also, either way, do order of declarations matter here? With the constraint you cited,

> Constraint: An <instantiation-arg> that corresponds to a deferred type
            that does not have the ABSTRACT attribute shall not be
            abstract.

it makes sense if the explicit specification comes before the REQUIRE. The T within R1 doesn't have the abstract attribute, so when the explicit specification of T in T10 is passed to it, the compiler errors.

But what if it comes after?
``
  TEMPLATE T10{T}
      REQUIRES R1{T} ! invalid, T is abstract
      TYPE, DEFERRED, ABSTRACT :: T
   END TEMPLATE
```

Does the constraint still apply? Does the compiler need to scan ahead for the explicit specification first, and then recurse into the REQUIRES?

            deferred type, then all ultimate specifications of that
            deferred argument shall be deferred type.

If any ultimate specification of a deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE
attribute, then the deferred type has the EXTENSIBLE attribute.

> If all ultimate specifications of a deferred type have the ABSTRACT
> attribute, then the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute. Otherwise
> the deferred type does not have the ABSTRACT attribute.

Reviewer: Should this be a constraint? Otherwise there's nothing to indicate that
```f90
  TEMPLATE T10{T}
      TYPE, DEFERRED, ABSTRACT :: T
      REQUIRES R1{T} ! invalid, T is abstract
   END TEMPLATE
```
is actually *invalid*. It just says that T (in the scope of T10) is not abstract; that's not necessarily an error. But we want the compiler to error here.

```suggestion
Constraint: If any ultimate specification of a deferred type has the
            ABSTRACT attribute, then all ultimate specifications of that
            deferred type shall have the ABSTRACT attribute.
```

Author: We do have the necessary constraint in the other paper:

```
Constraint: An <instantiation-arg> that corresponds to a deferred type
            that does not have the ABSTRACT attribute shall not be
            abstract.
```

When taken together with the statement "A deferred type with the ABSTRACT is an abstract derived type."

We don't want to do it the way you wrote in your suggestion because it would make other examples invalid, namely

```
   TEMPLATE T9{T}
      TYPE, DEFERRED, EXTENSIBLE :: T
      REQUIRES R3{T} ! valid, T is just extensible
   END TEMPLATE
```
and
```
   TEMPLATE T15{T}
      REQUIRES R2{T}
      REQUIRES R3{T} ! valid, T is just extensible
   END TEMPLATE
```

Reviewer: Ah, I agree my constraint breaks examples T9 and T15. However, I don't think that constraint you referenced solves the issue. Actually, I think the/another problem here is that the normative text you wrote here creates conflicting assignment of the ABSTRACT attribute.

Above on line 331, there's this statement (with a grammatical error that should be fixed :) I put the fixed word in brackets)

> A deferred type with the ABSTRACT _[attribute]_ is an abstract derived type. 

(Also, we don't actually specify that the EXTENSIBLE and ABSTRACT keywords in the declaration give the extensible or abstract attribute. Also the standard doesn't call "extensible" an "attribute"... ok that part above on line 331 needs another look. But we know what we mean! I think...)

I'm assuming that we intended the paragraph at line 331 to say that the ABSTRACT keyword in a deferred type declaration gives the deferred type the abstract attribute.

But then you wrote

> If all ultimate specifications of a deferred type have the ABSTRACT
attribute, then the deferred type has the ABSTRACT attribute. **Otherwise
the deferred type does not have the ABSTRACT attribute.**

So in T10, the part from line 331 says T is abstract, but your new text says it's not abstract.

Reviewer: Oops, I didn't see you already fixed the grammar issue in the next commit :)

Author: > So in T10, the part from line 331 says T is abstract, but your new text says it's not abstract.

Actually T10 is invalid, as mentioned in the comment, because of the above constraint.

Reviewer: I know T10 is invalid. But again, your new normative text here says that T does not have the abstract attribute. That conflicts with its declaration.

Author: :thinking: I think I see what you're getting act. You're saying that my normative text actually makes T11 valid, because since not all ultimate specifications of T have the ABSTRACT attribute, T does not have the ABSTRACT attribute, and therefore could be an instantiation arg for R2. I think I can rework to fix that.
